---
layout: default
title: Slack Channel Funnel
---

# Channel Funnel Privacy Policy

The following is the privacy policy for the Channel Funnel application (the "Service"). Roam Tools runs the Service. The protection of your data and confidentiality is very important.

This page informs you of our policies regarding the collection, use, and disclosure of personal data when you use our Service and the choices you have associated with that data.

We use your data to provide and improve the Service. By using the Service, you agree to the collection and use of information in accordance with this policy.

## Definitions

* **Service** is the Channel Funnel Slack application and the website that you are currently viewing.
* **Personal Data** is data about a living individual who can be identified from those data (or from those and other information either in our possession or likely to come into our possession).
* **Usage Data** is data collected automatically either generated by the use of the Service or from the Service infrastructure itself (for example, the duration of a page visit).
* **Cookies** are small pieces of data stored on your device (computer or mobile device).
* **Data Controller** is the natural or legal person who (either alone or jointly or in common with other persons) determines the purposes for which and the manner in which any personal information are, or are to be, processed.
* **Data Processor (or Service Provider)** is any natural or legal person who processes the data on behalf of the Data Controller.
* **Data Subject (or User)** is any living individual who is using our Service and is the subject of Personal Data.

## Information Collected

No Personal Data is collected or retained that is not already available to the Service through the Slack API. All Personal Data is handled by either Slack or Stripe. The only piece of Usage Data that is retained links the Stripe subscription to a Slack Team ID or Enterprise ID.

We use Cookies and similar tracking technologies to track the activity on our Service and hold certain information.

Cookies are files with small amount of data which may include an anonymous unique identifier. Cookies are sent to your browser from a website and stored on your device. Tracking technologies also used are beacons, tags, and scripts to collect and track information and to improve and analyze our Service.

You can instruct your browser to refuse all Cookies or to indicate when a cookie is being sent. However, if you do not accept Cookies, you may not be able to use some portions of our Service.

Examples of Cookies we use:

    Session Cookies. We use Session Cookies to operate our Service.
    Preference Cookies. We use Preference Cookies to remember your preferences and various settings.
    Security Cookies. We use Security Cookies for security purposes.

## Use of Data

Roam Tools uses the collected data for various purposes:
* To provide and maintain our Service
* To notify you about changes to our Service
* To provide customer support
* To gather analysis or valuable information so that we can improve our Service
* To monitor the usage of our Service
* To detect, prevent and address technical issues

## Legal Basis for Processing Personal Data Under General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)

If you are from the European Economic Area (EEA), Roam Tools's legal basis for collecting and using the personal information described in this Privacy Policy depends on the Personal Data we collect and the specific context in which we collect it.

Roam Tools may process your Personal Data because:
* We need to perform a contract with you
* You have given us permission to do so
* The processing is in our legitimate interests and it's not overridden by your rights
* For payment processing purposes
* To comply with the law

## Retention of Data

Roam Tools will retain your Personal Data only for as long as is necessary for the purposes set out in this Privacy Policy. We will retain and use your Personal Data to the extent necessary to comply with our legal obligations (for example, if we are required to retain your data to comply with applicable laws), resolve disputes, and enforce our legal agreements and policies.

Roam Tools will also retain Usage Data for internal analysis purposes. Usage Data is generally retained for a shorter period of time, except when this data is used to strengthen the security or to improve the functionality of our Service, or we are legally obligated to retain this data for longer time periods.

If you wish to be informed what Personal Data we hold about you and if you want it to be removed from our systems, please contact us.

## Transfer of Data

Your information, including Personal Data, may be transferred to — and maintained on — computers located outside of your state, province, country or other governmental jurisdiction where the data protection laws may differ than those from your jurisdiction.

If you are located outside the United States of America and choose to provide information to us, please note that we transfer the data, including Personal Data, to the United States of America and process it there.

Your consent to this Privacy Policy followed by your submission of such information represents your agreement to that transfer.

Roam Tools will take all steps reasonably necessary to ensure that your data is treated securely and in accordance with this Privacy Policy and no transfer of your Personal Data will take place to an organization or a country unless there are adequate controls in place including the security of your data and other personal information.

## Service Providers

### Payments

We may provide paid products and/or services within the Service. In that case, we use third-party services for payment processing (e.g. payment processors).

We will not store or collect your payment card details. That information is provided directly to our third-party payment processors whose use of your personal information is governed by their Privacy Policy. These payment processors adhere to the standards set by PCI-DSS as managed by the PCI Security Standards Council, which is a joint effort of brands like Visa, Mastercard, American Express and Discover. PCI-DSS requirements help ensure the secure handling of payment information.

The payment processors we work with are:
* **Stripe:** Their Privacy Policy can be viewed at https://stripe.com/us/privacy

## Amendments To This Privacy Policy

We reserve the right to amend this Privacy Policy. The current version of the Privacy Policy will be available at [https://thomasstep.com/slack-channel-funnel-privacy-policy](https://thomasstep.com/slack-channel-funnel-privacy-policy). You are advised to review this Privacy Policy periodically for any changes. Changes to this Privacy Policy are effective when they are posted on this page.

## Contact Us

If you have any questions about this Privacy Policy, please contact us by email: thomas@thomasstep.com
