---
layout: post
title:  "re:Invent 2021"
author: Thomas
tags: [ aws ]
description: Summary of my experience at AWS re:Invent 2021
---

Last week I was lucky enough to be in Las Vegas attending the 10th annual re:Invent. I have already posted my notes from most of the sessions that I attended and I will link them all at the end of this post. Overall, I had a great time but reality did not exactly meet my expectations as is normally the case. I want to go over and solidify some of those suggestions for my future self and others. After going over my suggestions, I want to bring to light some of the recurring themes through my sessions and areas where I want to dive deeper.

Before too many suggestions and learnings from the conference as a whole, I want to congratulate myself for being on top of seat reservation. Almost my entire schedule was sorted out before I arrived in Las Vegas. For me, this helped alleviate stress. I overheard numerous people talking about the scarcity of reserved seats in sessions they wanted to attend. That being said, I do not think a single session I attended was at full capacity. While reservations may not be required, I liked having them so I could properly plan out my day.

Sessions I attended were mostly in the serverless and architecture tracks. While I do not necessarily reject doing this again, it might be better to go to various technical talks instead of focusing on one or two paths because I started noticing quite a bit of repeated information. If I get to go next year, I will probably expand my reach to topics such as databases, data and analytics, and other DevOps-related talks. At least that is where my thoughts are now.

From a logistical standpoint traversing the venue distances started adding up. I had one day with most of my sessions in the same venue and that was quite enjoyable. The other 3 days were filled with walking to and from venues. I started using the shuttles about 2 days in which greatly helped my feet. Next time, I will plan to minimize movement if possible and use the shuttles from day one.

Now for the fun stuff. One of my favorite sessions (excluding keynotes) was about [event-driven architecture](/blog/reinvent-building-next-gen-applications-with-event-driven-architectures). For the same reason I like the "This Is My Architecture" video series, I enjoyed this session: I receive great benefit from seeing real-world examples. Taco Bell's presenter layed out their architecture and design decisions well, and I will seek out other such examples and sessions next time around.

As far as recurring topics, cell-based architectures, event-driven architectures, and Lambda powertools all came up in multiple sessions. I have a feeling that event-driven architectures have been a popular subject at re:Invent for more than just this year because Lambda is such a powerful service. Cell-based architectures only appeared on my radar several months ago. Cell-based architectures supply great resiliency benefits, so a cell-based architecture can still employ an event-driven architecture within each cell. This is something that I would love to create and deploy. Finally, [Lambda powertools](https://awslabs.github.io/aws-lambda-powertools-python/latest/#install) is a set of commonly used and beneficial functionality that is available as a package for Python or a Lambda layer. Since I normally operate in the world of Javascript, it might take me a while to test this out; however, I am very intrigued by the set of functionality it offers. I wonder when AWS will offer this in other languages...

Finally, I wanted to bring up an event that was incredibly enjoyable: Dr. Werner Vogels keynote. I am a fan of Dr. Vogels, so I knew that I had to get an in-person seat at his keynote. The following are a couple of the key notes that I took away from his talk.

- Build primitives instead of frameworks
  - Good primitives (like levers and wheels) can help create much more powerful things
- Premature optimization is a killer
- 6 Rules for Good API Design:
  1. APIs are forever
  2. Never break backward compatibility
  3. Work backwards from customer use cases
  4. Create APIs with explicit and well-documented failure modes
  5. Create APIs that are self-describing and have a clear, specific purpose
  6. Avoid leaking implementation details at all costs
- [Well Architected Sustainability pillar](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/sustainability-pillar/sustainability-pillar.html)
  - Serverless as a way to reduce carbon footprint with auto-scaling
  - "Don't forget to turn off the lights"
- His favorite Builder's Library articles
  - [Making retries safe with idempotent APIs](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/making-retries-safe-with-idempotent-APIs)
  - [Reliability, constant work, and a good cup of coffee](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/reliability-and-constant-work)
- "Developers change the cloud"
- "Log everything"
  - While talking about [New World](https://www.newworld.com/) and the data analytics infrastructure behind the game

My favorite bits out of all of that are his 6 Rules for Good API Design followed closely by him saying "developers change the code." All-in-all a great talk that was worth the wait.

My other re:Invent notes:
- [Beyond Five 9s: Lessons From Our Highest Available Data Planes](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-beyond-five-9s-lessons-from-our-highest-available-data-planes)
- [The Journey To Adopt Cloud-Native Architectures For Hyperscale](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-the-journey-to-adopt-cloud-native-architectures-for-hyperscale)
- [Evolutionary AWS Lambda Functions With Hexagonal Architecture](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-evolutionary-aws-lambda-functions-with-hexagonal-architecture)
- [Inside A Working Serverless SaaS Reference Solution](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-inside-a-working-serverless-saas-reference-solution)
- [Building Next-Gen Applications With Event-Driven Architectures](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-building-next-gen-applications-with-event-driven-architectures)
- [Best Practices Of Advanced Serverless Developers](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-best-practices-of-advanced-serverless-developers)
- [How Amazon.com Transforms Customer Experiences Through AI/ML](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-how-amazon.com-transforms-customer-experiences-through-ai-ml)
- [Best Practices For Disaster Recovery Of Workloads On AWS](https://thomasstep.com/blog/reinvent-best-practices-for-disaster-recovery-of-workloads-on-aws)