The old (but unfortunately still utilized) way of organizing a team to create a software application is by splitting the project into two main sides of the technology stack, software development and operations. Software development is what I enjoy and ultimately want to spend most of my time doing. Developers write the code that give machines purpose-built logic and processes. The other side of the coin is operations, which manages the infrastructure upon which a software application is deployed. When I first learned about these two parties I pictured two different stereotypes in my head; the software developers were the cool, hip, Silicon Valley types that drank coffee all day and coded on a Mac covered in stickers, while the operations side were displaced mainframe managers or sys admins that worked on old desktops. I was completely wrong. I had that image in my head because I was afraid of the deep darkness of operations. I heard that operations was not an entirely well-documented place that featured cryptic shell scripts and low level commands. While some companies might still run their engineering teams this way, I now know that the days of those spooky cobweb-filled corners of the internet do not need to exist any more.

In come the cloud providers: AWS, GCP, Azure, DigitalOcean, and plenty of others. In my opinion, cloud providers were the only way to move infrastructure and operations teams into a newer, faster-paced environment. No longer does a company need to maintain a data center. No longer does a company need to buy and refresh hardware. No longer is there incredible tribal knowledge inside an engineering organization's operations teams. Cloud providers wash all of that away and make infrastructure self-service and easy. Instead of a company owning a data center, they can just use a portion of a larger one. Instead of worrying about hardware, the provider worries about hardware for their clients. Instead of having tribal knowledge of deployment processes and infrastructure configuration, those same processes and configuration can be kept in version control with infrastructure as code. By shifting the 

With everything moving to the cloud, documentation is no longer an in-house catastrophe. Have you used AWS's documentation? There is a lot of documentation. Architecture examples, API calls, CloudFormation templates. It seems like anything that anyone could ever want to do has already been done and documented. I only see this as a positive because it gives newer users a point of reference and broadcasts best practices. I looked over heaps of documentation when I first started with AWS. I didn't know what I was doing, and there was no one helping me learn other than the fine folks of the internet. The amount that I did learn was tremendous and momentous. What I can do in a few days with AWS used to take an entire organization the same amount of time with less stability in the end product. It's no wonder engineering organizations want to move to the cloud with a DevOps methodology. 

Cloud providers give amazing power to their users and adopters' applications and architectures that are being used and thought up are constantly changing to better use the quick, easy, pay-per-use cloud-centric model. Without cloud service providers being able to make their businesses profitable, make the services user-friendly, and continually improve upon processes, giving developers the chance to wield this much power would not be possible. By shifting the responsibility of managing a data center away from numerous companies with various levels of proficiency, cloud providers are able to focus on what they do best while their clients can focus on building with the result of the finely tuned data centers. With the ease of spinning up and tearing down cloud infrastructure, companies can move faster when it comes to building out proofs of concept and MVP, and having economy of scale also allows cloud computing to become cheaper. I think a huge part of the move to cloud computing is the user-friendliness. There are parties on the internet saying that providers like AWS are too large and too difficult to learn, but if you throw yourself into the fire (like I was), then learning what all AWS is actually is not impossible as some might make you think. Like I said, the documentation is there. Countless YouTube videos and other courses exist to teach people how to operate with cloud providers. If it was not easy, then people would not use it. The barrier to entry is also lower, which means that anyone can create services for less money and with less knowledge than before. Lastly, cloud providers are able to improve upon their own processes to make the cloud experience that much better. Higher uptimes, more useful services, cleaner documentation; these are some of the benefits that we reap whenever responsibility shifts onto those who do the job best.
